The presented case concerns a 61-year-old man (71 kg, 172 cm, with a body mass index of 23.9 kg/m²) eligible for a lung transplantation due to end-stage chronic respiratory failure caused by post-smoking-related emphysema, receiving continuous oxygen therapy (1 L/min) and nocturnal non-invasive ventilation. His main medical history includes dyslipidemia, hypertension, and a history of smoking estimated at 21 pack-years (cardiovascular risk factors). The preoperative assessment revealed predominantly post-capillary pulmonary hypertension, leading to the addition of perindopril (2 mg per day) and furosemide (40 mg per day). The detection of a positive tuberculosis result in the Elispot (enzyme-linked immunospot) test prompted the initiation of prophylactic treatment with rifampicin-isoniazid combination (600-300 mg per day) for a duration of three months.

Two months after the preoperative assessment, the patient underwent a left single lung transplantation without primary graft dysfunction5,6. Both the donor and the recipient tested positive for cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Epstein Barr Virus (EBV) serology. Positive toxoplasmosis serology was detected only in the recipient. The induction immunosuppressive treatment included methylprednisolone (500 mg on day 0 and 375 mg on day +1 post-transplantation) and basiliximab, a monoclonal antibody directed against interleukin-2 (20 mg on day 0 and day +4 post-transplantation). Starting from day +2 post-transplantation, immunosuppression was maintained through an oral triple therapy regimen, comprising an initial dosage of 5 mg per day of tacrolimus, 2000 mg per day of mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), and 20 mg per day of prednisone. The associated treatments are presented in Table I.

The clinical course was marked by the occurrence on day +5 post-transplantation of respiratory deterioration due to left pulmonary reperfusion edema, with possible cardiogenic involvement. Grade III acute rejection, suggested by the presence of lymphocytic infiltrates in transbronchial biopsies, was confirmed by histopathology. Intravenous methylprednisolone treatment (1000 mg on day 1, 500 mg on day 2, 250 mg on day 3, followed by a progressive tapering of oral prednisone dosage by 25 to 50% every three to four days, reaching a dosage of 0.15 mg/kg/day) was initiated. Follow-up transbronchial biopsies performed one week after the treatment showed non-progressing rejection. The presence of donor-specific anti-HLA (human leukocyte antigen) antibodies, known as DSA, led to the implementation of immunomodulatory treatment with polyvalent immunoglobulins (1 g/kg/day for two days every month for three months). No clinically significant abnormalities were detected in the biological evaluations, particularly with regard to infection (negative Epstein Barr Virus and CMV polymerase chain reaction (PCR), sterile microbiological cultures of bronchoalveolar fluid, C-reactive protein (CRP) at 9 mg/L, and leukocytes at 4.5 G/L). Therapeutic monitoring revealed persistently subtherapeutic blood concentrations of tacrolimus since the beginning of the lung transplantation, despite optimal therapeutic adherence (Figure 1).

Polypharmacy in transplant patients leads to numerous potential drug interactions that need to be identified and managed in order to maintain the clinical efficacy of immunosuppressive treatments.